VEGETATION



BACKGROUND


	Spectral data:  The spectral properties of individual leaves have been 
well-
understood for quite a long time (e.g., Gates et al., 1965), especially in the 
VNIR 
and SWIR.  Until recently, laboratory instrumentation was not available to make 
equivalent measurements in the thermal infrared, but recent spectroscopic 
studies have provided confirmation of general information derived from earlier 
broad-band measurements (Salisbury and Milton, 1988).  Although leaf spectra 
are readily available, good canopy spectra are not, because of the technical 
difficulty of making such measurements.  In the reflective region, difficulties 
arise 
particularly in the SWIR from the strong water vapor absorption bands in solar 
radiation illuminating the canopy, which leave large gaps in the spectrum where 
they absorb completely, and introduce observational difficulties even where they 
do not (Biehl et al., 1984).  Atmospheric absorption of emitted radiation is a 
problem in the thermal infrared region, along with an historical limitation on 
the 
availability of portable field spectrometers.  These difficulties have been at 
least 
partially remedied by spectral measurements of leaf piles and canopy parts in 
the 
laboratory to provide simulated canopy spectra relatively untroubled by water 
vapor absorption (e.g.., Salisbury and Milton, 1988).


BRDF data:  Ever since the pioneering measurements of directional scattering 
properties of individual leaves by Breece and Holmes (1971), gradually more 
sophisticated models of canopy scattering have been developed, as best 
summarized by Kimes (1984).  Such models are not simple, because canopy 
scattering is complicated by the fact that individual leaf reflectances vary 
with 
wavelength, from predominantly surface scattering in the visible and TIR 
regions, 
to predominantly volume scattering in the SWIR and MWIR regions; and typical 
leaf orientation varies during different growth stages for a given species, and 
from one species to another.  To provide real data input to such models, Goddard 
Space Flight Center developed a sphere-scanning radiometer, called the 
PARABOLA, for field measurements of the BRDF of natural surfaces (Deering 
and Leone, 1984).  This field instrument typically measures BRDF in three 
narrow bandpasses in the visible, near-infrared, and shortwave infrared.  
Typical 
scattering data for soils and vegetation have been summarized by Deering 
(1989), and have been made available by Don Deering in digital form.  Other 
field 
measurements have been made in the VNIR and SWIR regions of the spectrum 
by Ranson et al. (1985).  Few measurements of directional emittance have been 
made because of the unavailability, until recently, of appropriate field 
instruments.  We have made field measurements that show that conifers are 
Lambertian emitters because of the strong canopy scattering produced by 
randomly-oriented needles.  However, some preliminary measurements by 
others appear to show small, but inconsistent, directional effects on grass 
canopy 
emissivities (Norman and Balick, 1992), which may be due to the quasi-parallel 
surfaces produced by the bent tips of long grass.  Such directional effects 
could 
be even greater for deciduous leaf canopies, where leaf orientations tend to be 
more horizontal (depending on species).  
  

NATURE OF GENERIC BACKGROUND SPECTRA GENERATED HERE

VEGETATION

	Spectral data:  Spectra were assembled from two segments; the VNIR and 
SWIR comprising segment one, and the MWIR and TIR comprising segment two.  
The first segment for trees used simulated canopy spectra measured by Barry 
Rock of the University of New Hampshire on leaf piles and canopy parts using a 
GER IRIS Mark IV field spectrometer in the laboratory.  The tree leaves or 
branches were illuminated from directly above and measured at a reflectance 
angle of about 30 degrees (Barry Rock, personal communication).  The grass 
VNIR/SWIR spectra were measured in the laboratory at JHU, also with a GER 
IRIS Mark IV, using large pieces of fresh sod.  The grass was illuminated from 
directly above and measured at a reflectance angle of 60 degrees to avoid 
viewing the thatch.  

The artificial illumination sources used by Barry Rock and by us emit much less 
radiation in the blue region of the spectrum than does the sun.  This results in 
an 
instrumental artifact in GER IRIS Mark IV spectra, characterized by an apparent 
increase in reflectance of the sample from the blue into the UV (the so-called 
"blue tail").  Spectra of vegetation measured outdoors are not affected in the 
blue 
region by atmospheric water vapor absorption, and so have been used to check 
the true reflectance spectra of vegetation, which actually decline through the 
blue 
and into the UV.  Thus, the VNIR/SWIR segments of the vegetation spectra were 
corrected by hand to remove the blue tail before being joined with the thermal 
infrared segments.

The thermal infrared segments were generated by us from 10-degree directional 
hemispherical reflectance spectra of needle and leaf piles, or, in the case of 
grass, from sod.  Conifer needles, deciduous tree leaves and grass blades all 
have a very low reflectance (high emissivity) throughout the thermal infrared 
range, although the conifer needles are consistently lower in reflectance than 
the 
other two.  There are subtle spectral features associated with differences in 
cuticular waxes that could be diagnostic of deciduous species in the laboratory 
(Salisbury and Milton, 1988).  The diagnostic differences in these features 
vary, 
however, typically only about 2%, and canopy scattering will further reduce this 
spectral contrast by a factor of at least two.  Thus, spectral features are of 
interest for laboratory applications, but not usually for remote sensing.  
Because 
spectral features are so subdued, we selected one typical deciduous leaf 
spectrum to represent all deciduous species, one conifer to represent all 
conifers, 
and one grass species to represent all grasses.  Each simulated tree canopy 
thermal infrared spectrum was reduced in reflectance by a factor of two to 
conservatively account for canopy scattering (conifers, in particular, should 
undergo more intense scattering, and field measurements show conifers to 
exhibit black body behavior within measurement error of about 1%).  The thermal 
infrared segments were then joined with the VNIR/SWIR segment of the 
appropriate species by making a straight-line interpolation between 2.5 and 3.0 
µm.  



REFERENCES

Breece, H. T. and Holmes, R. A., 1971, Bidirectional scattering characteristics 
of 
healthy green soybean and corn leaves in vivo: Applied Optics, v. 10, p. 119-
127.

Biehl, L. L., Daughtry, C. S. T., and Bauer, M. E., 1984, Vegetation and soils 
field 
research data base: Experiment summaries, LARS Technical Report 042382, 
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 21 pp.

Condit, H. R., 1970, The spectral reflectance of American soils: Photogrammetric 
Engineering and Remote Sensing, v. 36, p. 955-966.

Deering, D. W., 1989, Field measurements of bidirectional reflectance: in Theory 
and Applications of Optical Remote Sensing, .edited by G. Asrar, J. Wiley and 
Sons, New York, p. 14-61.

Deering, D. W. and Leone, P., 1984, A sphere-scanning radiometer for rapid 
directional measurements of sky and ground radiance:  The PARABOLA field 
instrument: NASA Technical Memorandum 86171, 87 pp.

Dozier, J., and Warren, S. G., 1982, Effect of viewing angle on the infrared 
brightness temperature of snow: Water resources Research,, v. 18, p. 1424-
1434.

Eaton, F. D., and Dirmhirn, I., 1979, Reflected irradiance indicatrices of 
natural 
surfaces and their effect on albedo: Applied Optics, v. 18, p. 994-1008.

Gates, D. M., Kegan, H. J., Schleter, J. C., and Weidner, V. R., 1965, Spectral 
properties of plants: Applied Optics, v. 4, p. 11-20.

Kimes, D. S., 1984, Modeling the directional reflectance from complete 
homogeneous vegetation canopies with various leaf-orientation distributions: 
Jour. of the Optical Society of America, v. 1, p. 725-737.

Norman, J.M., and Balick, L. K., 1992, Directional temperature and emissivity of 
vegetation: Model and measurements: Abstracts of the World Space Congress, 
28 August-5 September, 1992, Washington, DC, p. 320.

Ranson, K. F., Daughtry, C. S. T., Biehl, L L.., and Bauer, M. E., 1985, Sun-
view 
angle effects on reflectance factors of corn canopies: Remote Sensing of 
Environment, v. 18, p. 147-161.

Salisbury, J. W. and D'Aria, D. M., 1992, Emissivity of terrestrial materials in 
the 
8-14 µm atmospheric window:  Remote Sensing of Environment, v. 42, p. 83-106.

Salisbury, J. W. and Milton, N. M., 1988, Thermal infrared (2.5 to 13.5-µm) 
directional hemispherical reflectance of leaves:  Photogrammetric Engineering 
and Remote Sensing, v. 54, p. 1301-1304.

Shepard, M. K., Arvidson, R. E., and Guinness, E. A., 1993, Specular scattering 
on terrestrial playas and implications for planetary surface studies: Jour. of 
Geophysical Research, v. 98, p. 18,707-18718.

Stoner, E. R., Baumgardner, M. F.  Biehl, L. L., and Robinson, B. F., 1980, 
Atlas 
of soil Reflectance properties: Research Bulletin 962, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN.

