Moderate to fine subangular blocky structure, slightly hard and very friable. 
0.16% organic carbon; 7.3% clay; 7.7% silt; 85.5% sand.

Clay mineralogy: medium mica peak, small montmorillonite and kaolinite 
peaks.

Coarse mineralogy: 86% quartz, 12% potassic feldspar, 1% other, and traces 
of plagioclase feldspar, amphibole, pyroxene, opaque, garnet, calcite, zircon, 
and tourmaline.  

Spectral Description:  The weakness of the 2.71 montmorillonite kaolinite 
feature is consistent with the lack of short wavelength asymmetry of the 2.21 
montmorillonite band.  The intensity of this feature, its long wavelength 
asymmetry and the breadth of the 2.76 montmorillonite band all are 
consistent with contributions from both muscovite and montmorillonite.  
Sifting shows that this sample has the same amount of sand size material as 
sample 87P3468, yet the quartz combination tone bands clearly show that 
its spectrum is dominated by larger particle sizes of quartz.  The larger 
"spectral" particle size can be seen in the stronger expression of the weak 
bands near 3.73 and 3.84 microns, seem only as faint shoulders for sample 
87P3468, as well as the stronger 4.47 microns feature.  One result is stronger 
reststrahlen bands, which are greatly distorted by considerably greater 
absorption of kaolinite grain coatings than seen in the previous three 
samples, despite the apparently small amount present.  This produces the 
characteristic asymmetry of the reststrahlen features by shortening the long 
wavelength side of the doublet and causes the trough near 8.98 microns.  
Although this soil has the same amount of K-feldspar as sample 87P3468, 
the usual side bands on the long wavelength flank of the reststrahlen doublet 
are not well expressed.  However, the peak of the long wavelength side of 
the doublet is seen at longer wavelength (9.27 microns) and the flank is 
broadened compared to a quartz doublet without a K-feldspar contribution 
(compare 87P473).


