Weak medium granular structure, slightly hard, friable.  0.86% organic 
carbon; 6.3% clay; 8.5% silt; 85.2% sand.

Clay mineralogy: small mica peak and weak vermiculite, kaolinite, and 
goethite peaks.

Coarse mineralogy: 75% quartz, 20% potassic feldspar, 4% plagioclase 
feldspar, 3% tourmaline, trace amounts of muscovite, microcline and 
opaque.

Spectral Description:  The short wavelength asymmetry of the 2.21 microns 
hydroxyl absorption band, the weak features near 2.35 and 2.39 microns and 
the sharp hydroxyl feature near 2.71 microns are all consistent with 
kaolinite.  However, the kaolinite 2.76 microns hydroxyl band has been 
considerably broadened by montmorillonite, which has also added an 
additional distinct feature near 2.25 microns and increased the downward 
slope of the near-infrared spectrum due to increased breadth of the broad 
water band due to interlayer water.  Weak H-C stretching vibration bands 
near 3.41 and 3.50 microns on the long wavelength flank of the broad water 
band are accompanied by a broad, weak hydrocarbon band near 2.49 
microns.  Quartz combination tone absorption bands dominate the long 
wavelength side of the primary volume scattering peak and their relative 
intensities indicate the spectral dominance of coarse particle size.  A 
moderately strong H-O-H band near 6.1 microns obscures the 5.93 quartz 
combination tone band, but the band is not so strong and broad as to subdue 
the quartz bands to shorter wavelength as, for example, in sample 87P4453.  
The quartz reststrahlen doublet and its band gap near 8.63 microns are 
overshadowed by a K-feldspar reststrahlen peak near 9.27 microns, with 
weak side bands to longer wavelength.  There appears to have been only 
minor absorption near 8.97 microns by kaolinitic grain coatings.  The lack of 
a broad secondary volume scattering peak between the feldspar peak and the 
alpha quartz doublet near 12.6 microns is another indication of the relatively 
coarse particle size of the quartz.
