Fine granular structure, slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and 
plastic,mildly alkaline (pH 7.4).  0.89% organic carbon; 7.2% clay; 64.3% 
silt; 28.5% sand.

Clay mineralogy: not measured.

Coarse mineralogy: 70% quartz, 10% glass, 8% glass aggregate, 4% 
tourmaline, 3% plagioclase feldspar, 3% muscovite, 2% glass-coated grains 
and traces of potassic feldspar.

Spectral Description:  This spectrum is a little noisy in the near infrared, but 
the characteristic long wavelength asymmetry of the absorption band near 
2.20 microns and a strong absorption near 2.76 microns indicate that the clay 
present is an illite/smectite, although muscovite would contribute to these 
bands.  The strength of the feature near 2.76 microns suggests that either 
more muscovite is present than appears to be, or that the clay is quite illitic.  
The weak shoulder near 2.71 microns indicates the presence of minor 
kaolinite.  Both kaolinite and illite/smectite could contribute the very weak 
features near 2.35 and 2.39 microns.  The weak hydrocarbon features near 
3.41 and 3.50 microns are accompanied by the typical weak, broad feature 
near 2.50 microns and strong H-O-H absorption near 6.1 microns.  The long 
wavelength flank of the primary volume scattering reflectance peak is 
dominated by quartz combination tone absorption bands, the relative 
intensities of which indicate this sample is dominated by fine particle size, 
although the strong H-O-H absorption quenches the 5.93 micron band.  The 
reflectance doublet centered near 6.5 microns appears to be the result of 
quartz combination one absorption bands superimposed on the reflectance 
peak of organic matter common in this spectral region.  The quartz 
reststrahlen doublet has a typical feldspar reststrahlen peak superimposed on 
its long wavelength flank near 9.27 microns, with a side band near 9.62 
microns, to which the muscovite may contribute.  The broad peak between 
these features and the barely perceptible alpha quartz doublet near 12.6 
microns is due to secondary volume scattering with a possible contribution 
by organic matter.
