Weak medium granular structure, very friable and non-sticky and non-
plastic, moderately acidic (pH 5.8).  0.61% organic carbon, 8.1% clay, 
18.7% silt, 73.2% sand.

Clay mineralogy: small kaolinite, mica and vermiculite peaks, and weak 
goethite and quartz peaks.

Coarse mineralogy: 73% quartz, 15% potassic feldspar, 5% weathered 
aggregate, 4% resistant aggregate, 2% opaque, 1% other, 1% zircon, and 
traces of biotite, amphibole, garnet and chlorite.  

Spectral Description: The short wavelength asymmetry of the hydroxyl 
absorption band near 2.21 microns appears to be contributed by kaolinite, as 
are the features near 2.35 and 2.38 microns, the sharp band near 2.70 
microns, the shoulder near 2.74 microns and the 2.76 micron band.  A very 
weak feature near 2.25 microns and a slight broadening of the 2.76 micron 
band suggests the presence of minor muscovite or montmorillonite.  Weak 
hydrocarbon bands are displayed near 3.42 and 3.50 microns and they are 
accompanied by a broad weak hydrocarbon feature near 2.5 microns, despite 
the small amount of hydrocarbon present.  All bands to longer wavelength 
are dominated by fairly coarse quartz, the relatively large particle size being 
indicated by the relative intensities of the quartz combination tone 
absorption bands on the long wavelength side of the primary volume 
scattering reflectance peak.  Coating of quartz grains by kaolinite result in 
the typical reduced reflectance for the longer wavelength side of the quartz 
reststrahlen doublet and the inversion of its peak into a trough due to 
kaolinite absorption.  K-feldspar may contribute to the peak on the long 
wavelength side of the quartz doublet near 9.25 microns, but not in great 
amount, considering the lack of significant side bands on the long 
wavelength flank of the quartz reststrahlen feature.  Kaolinite absorption 
yields the very weak minimum near 10.93 microns between the quartz 
reststrahlen and the alpha quartz doublet near 12.6 microns.
