The Johns Hopkins University mineral library was published as a 
book by the Johns Hopkins University Press in 1991 (title and 
authors below).  The Introduction to this book is summarized below 
to document how samples were selected, characterized and 
measured, as well as to explain the origins of spectral features for 
different kinds of minerals.





Infrared (2.1 - 25 micrometers) Spectra of Minerals

by 

John W. Salisbury
The Johns Hopkins University

Louis S. Walter
Goddard Space Flight Center

Norma Vergo
U. S. Geological Survey

and

Dana M. D'Aria
University of Maryland


Dedication

To our co-author, Norma Vergo, whose untimely death is mourned by 
us and all who knew her.


Acknowledgments

Most mineral samples were provided courtesy of John White, of the 
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, and Paul Powhat 
was extremely helpful in their selection.  We are also grateful to 
Gene Jarosewich and Joseph Nelen for use of the Smithsonian 
microprobe.  Ms. Jane Jellison, of the Goddard Space Flight Center, 
kindly prepared samples for microprobe analysis.  This research was 
supported by the Solid Earth Science and Solar System Exploration 
Branches of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration.


Introduction

In her thorough review of the use of infrared spectroscopy in 
mineralogy, Estep-Barnes (1977) listed infrared spectral libraries for 
minerals, rocks, and inorganic compounds published prior to 1975.  
Only Hunt and Salisbury (1975, 1976), Lyon and Green (1975), 
Vincent et al. (1975), and Ferraro (1982) have been published 
subsequently.  

Most of these libraries consist of transmittance measurements, which 
have limited application to remote sensing problems because they do 
not include the effects of scattering (Salisbury et al., 1987a).

Only the works of Lyon (1963, 1964), Lyon and Green (1975), Hunt 
and Salisbury (1974, 1975, 1976), and Vincent et al. (1975) contain 
reflectance and/or emittance data that can be used to predict the  
spectral behavior of minerals and rocks in a remote sensing situation.  
However, these data lack the potentially significant 3-5 micrometers 
region of the spectrum, do not document the effects of different 
particle sizes on the spectra of most samples, typically lack complete 
chemical and mineralogical sample characterization, and are not 
available in digital form.  The present work seeks to remedy all of 
these shortcomings for 130 minerals.  It is an expansion on an Open-
File Report of the U. S. Geological Survey (Salisbury et al., 1987a) 
which, not being generally available to the public, was of limited 
usefulness to the remote sensing community.  The present work also 
adds digital data for all of the spectra in ASCII format on an 
accompanying CD-ROM disk.

Experimental Technique

Acquisition and Preparation of Samples  
Most samples were acquired, often as single crystals, from the 
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History.  Other samples 
were obtained from the Hunt and Salisbury collection in Denver or 
from individuals.  

Most samples were crushed in a steel percussion mortar, after which 
steel particles were removed with a hand magnet.  Crushed samples 
were hand-picked when impurities were present, ultrasonically 
cleaned, and then subjected, when necessary, to an acid wash to 
insure purity.  Samples were ground in a sintered sapphire mortar 
under either acetone or (more commonly) alcohol, which facilitated 
grinding, avoided disordering of the sheet silicates, and prevented 
the finest particles from drifting away as aerosols.

Particulate samples were dry-sieved to two different particle-size 
ranges (75-250 micrometers and 0-75 micrometers), and the coarser 
particle-size range was subsequently washed in acetone or alcohol to 
remove clinging fines.  Clay samples were disaggregated 
ultrasonically, and the <2 micrometers size fraction was concentrated 
with a centrifuge.

Characterization of Samples:  
Mineral specimens were initially examined as hand samples and, 
after grinding to a powder, under a petrographic microscope.  This 
examination was typically combined with X-ray diffraction and 
microprobe analysis to identify those samples that were pure 
mineral phases and to establish their chemical and mineral 
compositions.  When other approaches to characterization were 
employed, this is noted in the mineral description sheets.  Unless 
otherwise noted on the description sheets, petrography was 
performed by Dana D'Aria, microprobe analyses by Louis Walter, and 
X-ray diffraction analysis by Norma Vergo.

The 0-75 micrometers fraction (except where noted) of all samples 
was characterized by X-ray diffraction using a Siemens D-500 X-ray 
diffractometer with CuKa radiation.  Samples were mounted using a 
side pack sample holder to achieve random orientation.  There were 
several samples that appeared to be monomineralic when studied by 
optical methods, but that had "extra" peaks in the X-ray patterns 
compared to the Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards 
(JCPDS) file cards.  These patterns were modeled by calculating 
allowed d-spacings from input unit cell dimensions using the 
Appleman and Evans (1973) cell refinement program.  The 
differences between the JCPDS and modeled patterns typically could 
be attributed to differences in ionic substitutions.

Additional tests were done to characterize the clay minerals.  The <2 
micrometers fraction was oriented on a glass slide using a Millipore 
filter setup (Drever, 1973).  These slides were then analyzed in the 
air-dried and glycol-solvated states.  K-saturation was done on the 
vermiculite sample.  The mixed-layer clay minerals were modeled 
using methods outlined in Reynolds (1980) and using the New Mod 
computer program written by R. C. Reynolds (Dartmouth College).

Microprobe analyses were performed on 75-250 micrometer sample 
fractions.  Through kind permission, the Applied Research 
Laboratory instrument at the Smithsonian Institution Division of 
Mineral Sciences was used.  Six fixed-wavelength dispersive 
detectors were used to analyze for Si, Al, Fe, Mg, Ca, and K.  Three 
movable, wavelength-dispersive detectors were used to analyze for 
Na, Ti, and Mn.  Quartz was used as a background standard for Al; 
alumina was used as a background standard for all other elements.

Standards employed were selected from those available at the 
Smithsonian:  rhodonite for Mn and Kakanui hornblende for all other 
elements.  The Bence-Albee correction procedure was used to 
convert intensity ratios to element/oxide abundances.  As usual for 
microprobe analyses, ferric and ferrous iron were not distinguished 
and Fe is reported as FeO.

In analyzing a mineral, points were accumulated for 10-second 
integration times.  Normally, four or five randomly selected points 
were analyzed on one or two grains.  Then, individual points were 
run on five or six additional grains.  If these analyses were 
equivalent within statistical counting error, the material was 
assumed to be homogeneous.  In some cases, small deviations from 
homogeneity were found and these are noted in the text.  

Estimated errors (as determined by replicate analyses) are:

Oxide	Coefficient of Variation (Rel. %)
SiO2	1.7
Al2O3  2
FeO	2
MgO	2
CaO	2
K2O	3
Na2O	5
TiO2	2
MnO	1

These estimates apply to cases in which the oxide abundance is 
greater than 3%.  The limit of reliable detection is generally about 
0.5%.

We found that all three different modes of sample characterization, 
microscopic, X-ray, and microprobe or other chemical analysis, were 
required to assure sample purity.  Based on this sample 
characterization process, generally two out of every three mineral 
samples were found to be insufficiently pure to be included in this 
compilation.  The results of the analyses are documented on each 
sample description sheet.  Mineral names and ideal formulae used on 
these sheets were taken from Fleischer (1983).

Acquisition of Spectra  
Spectra were acquired at 4 cm-1 resolution using either a Nicolet 5 
DXB or a Nicolet System 510 interferometer spectrometer; both 
spectrometers have identical optical benches  Transmittance and 
biconical reflectance spectral data were recorded from 2.08 to 25 
micrometers with a triglycine sulfate (TGS) detector, and directional 
hemispherical reflectance data were recorded from 2.08 to 14 
micrometers with a liquid helium-cooled, mercury-cadmium-
telluride (MCT) detector.

Transmittance was measured by passing the focused beam ( 6 mm 
diameter) of the interferometer through a KBr disk (commonly 
referred to as a pellet) containing sample material made in the 
manner of Stimson and O'Donnell (1952).  Briefly, these pellets 
consist of 300 mg of KBr mixed with about 0.7 mg of sample ground 
under alcohol to a size range less than 2 micrometers.  The pellets 
were pressed in a dye under vacuum for five minutes at 10,000 
kg/cm2 pressure to produce transparent disks 13 mm in diameter 
and 1 mm thick.  A reference pellet composed of pure KBr was used 
to record a background against which was ratioed the sample pellet 
transmittance.

Biconical reflectance spectra were recorded using a Spectra Tech 
"Collector" diffuse reflectance attachment, which uses two 90¡-off-
axis ellipsoids that act as 6x beam condensers; the focused beam 
diameter is thus reduced to 1 mm, and illumination and reflection 
occur at the specular angle over a solid angle that closely approaches 
p steradians.  Thus, our bidirectional reflectance measurements 
actually record biconical reflectance over a large solid angle.

An aluminum mirror was used as the background reference against 
which sample biconical reflectance was ratioed.  A mirror was used 
as the reference instead of Halon, because the latter exhibits strong 
absorption bands in most of the spectral range measured here.  Not 
only does the mirror provide a spectrally flat reference, but its high 
reflectance is required when measuring the reflectance of solid 
samples at the wavelengths of the fundamental molecular vibration 
bands.  As described below, minerals have a mirror-like opacity at 
such wavelengths, and smooth solid samples may have reflectances 
close to that of a mirror.  Use of biconical reflectance with a mirror 
reference makes the measured reflectance of a diffusely reflecting 
particulate sample roughly a factor of five lower than it would be for 
the integrating sphere measurements commonly made in the visible 
and near-infrared.

The Nicolet 5DXB and System 510 can switch the infrared beam from 
the sample compartment to an external port, through which it exits 
in collimated form.  An integrating sphere, coated inside with a 
diffusely reflecting gold surface, was attached to the instrument at 
this port.  The sphere is 12.7 cm in diameter and has a 2.5 cm 
diameter entrance port in the top of the sphere at 10¡ off the 
vertical, through which the beam passes to fall on a 2.5 cm diameter 
sample/reference port in the bottom of the sphere.  Beam size on the 
sample in that bottom port is 1.54 cm.  A 2.5 cm detector port is 
placed at an angle of 90¡ to the principal plane in the side of the 
sphere, and the liquid-nitrogen-cooled MCT detector chip is baffled 
to eliminate direct viewing of either the sample or the specular "hot 
spot" on the sphere wall.  A port at the specular angle was filled 
during the measurements reported below with a gold-coated plug 
having a surface curved to match the interior curvature of the 
sphere.

The integrating sphere uses a Labsphere diffuse gold surface as a 
reference. Sphere performance was carefully calibrated to provide 
absolute reflectance by comparing measured reflectances of Halon, a 
front-surface aluminum mirror, water, and a black body cone with 
values obtained from the National Bureau of Standards or found in 
the literature (Salisbury and Milton, 1987).

The usual sample holder for biconical reflectance measurements was 
13 mm in diameter and 2 mm deep, although a "microreflectance" 
holder 3 mm x 2 mm could also be used for very small samples.  The 
usual sample holder for hemispherical reflectance measurements 
was 2.5 cm in diameter and 3 mm deep.  That samples were optically 
thick at a depth of 2 mm was verified by comparison of spectra 
measured in bare aluminum cups with spectra measured in cups 
painted black.  Most particulate samples were sifted into the sample 
holders to attempt to achieve random orientation of grains.  For some 
samples, including all of the clay minerals, solid samples were not 
available.  In these cases, the fine powder samples were packed into 
a pseudo-solid sample so that the reflectance peaks of the 
fundamental molecular vibration (reststrahlen) bands could be seen.  
This was accomplished with <2 micrometers clays by placing them in 
a folded weighing paper and gently rolling a sample bottle over the 
outside surface.  This produced cohesive flakes that could be readily 
transferred to the reflectance attachment and measured.  Some 
samples such as the olivines, were not sufficiently fine-grained to 
produce flakes.  To make packed sample measurements of these 
samples, they were simply pressed into a sample cup with the flat 
side of a spatula.  Solid samples were fixed in a bed of moldable 
erasure to hold the surface being measured in a horizontal position.  
All samples could be raised or lowered by a micrometer screw 
mechanism so that the measurement surface was at the beam focus.

The Nicolet scans an interferogram each second.  Interferograms are 
then averaged to provide the desired signal-to-noise after 
deconvolution to a spectrum.  This normally required 100 scans for 
transmittance measurements and 500 to 1000 scans for reflectance.

Major Spectral Features of Minerals

The spectral features of minerals in the wavelength range considered 
here are the result of vibrational processes.  Their number, intensity 
and shape are dependent on atomic masses, interatomic force fields 
and, particularly, molecular geometry.  One goal of the spectroscopist 
is to quantitatively describe the vibrational process so that the origin 
of each absorption band can be understood.  Sophisticated 
calculations have been made that are consistent with observation, at 
least for the simpler minerals (e.g., Elcombe, 1967), although not 
necessarily correct or final.  Even if a vibrational mode were 
understood precisely, it is virtually impossible to describe such a 
motion simply and concisely for such complex structures as silicates.  
Consequently, one must rely on some very general description, such 
as "Si-O symmetric stretch," to describe all those vibrations which 
predominantly involve the symmetric expansion and contraction of 
the silicon-oxygen bonds.  Using such simplified visualizations, we 
can successfully generalize about the spectral behavior of minerals.  
For example, lighter atoms vibrate at higher frequencies (shorter 
wavelengths) than heavier atoms when substituted into the same 
structure (see olivines, p. 168-192).  Higher bond strengths also 
result in higher frequencies of vibration, and this change in bonding 
in silicates is related to the degree of polymerization of the Si-O4 ion 
(Walter and Salisbury, 1989).  This results in a systematic change in 
wavelengths of the fundamental vibration bands of silicates as the 
framework structure ultimately gives way to isolated tetrahedra.  
Finally, bond-stretching vibrations in covalent structures lie at 
higher frequencies than bending modes, and such internal molecular 
vibrations typically lie at higher frequencies than lattice modes 
(Farmer, 1974).

The most prominent features in the infrared spectra of minerals can 
be understood in the context of the generalizations outlined above 
and are described below for different types of minerals.  In 
particular, we point out those bands seen in reflectance or emittance 
that are not apparent in the transmittance spectra typically studied 
by others.  This discussion of the origins of spectral features is not 
repeated in the text for each mineral, because it would prove highly 
repetitious for the relatively well understood bands, such as the 
fundamental internal molecular vibration bands of the minerals and 
associated water and hydroxyl.  Those bands can easily be identified 
in the spectra of each mineral on the basis of the discussion below.  
The attribution of more complex features due to overtones and 
combination tones of the internal vibrations and lattice modes is a 
more speculative matter, even for the simplest of minerals.  Such 
speculation would also be repetitious and is not the function of this 
work.  Farmer (1974) discusses the spectral features of minerals at 
length, and Farmer and Palmieri (1975) provide an exhaustive list of 
references categorized by mineral.  Estep-Barnes (1977) presented a 
good review of the major spectral features of minerals, accompanied 
by an extensive bibliography.  The interested reader is referred to 
these works for the best information on the subject of detailed band 
assignments.

Silicates:  
The most intense spectral features of silicates, occurring between 8 
and 12 micrometers, are generally described as due simply to 
fundamental asymmetric Si-O-Si stretching vibrations, but Si-O-Al 
stretching vibrations may also contribute when aluminum is part of 
the crystal lattice (for the classic Si-O-Si stretching feature, see the 
9.2 micrometers band in quartz).  The appearance of these features 
typically changes in reflectance because of the role of the refractive 
index in scattering (see The Role of Surface and Volume Scattering, 
below).  The weak side band near 8.5 micrometers in the 
transmittance spectrum of quartz, for example, becomes a well-
defined lobe of a prominent reflectance doublet  between 8 and 10 
micrometers .  The reflectance spectrum of a quartz glass displays a 
much weaker short-wavelength lobe, which in some cases of shocked 
quartz we have seen is reduced to a shoulder.  This simplification of 
glass spectra of minerals is well known and is attributed generally to 
broadening of the bands (e.g., Farmer, 1974, p. 484).  However, 
broadening would not appear to explain the reduced intensity of the 
8.5 micrometers band in the spectrum of glass compared to that of 
crystalline quartz.   An alternative explanation is that the short-
wavelength lobe of the strong quartz reflectance doublet is not due 
entirely to internal molecular vibrations but depends to some extent 
on long-range order (Simon and McMahon, 1953).   Whatever the 
details of their origin, these most intense features fall in the 8-14 
micrometers atmospheric window, making them the most useful for 
terrestrial remote sensing of silicates (Kahle and Goetz, 1983; Walter 
and Salisbury, 1989).

The second most intense silicate bands are broadly characterized as 
O-Si-O deformation or bending modes, which occur in the 18-25 
micrometers region.  Again, aluminum and, indeed, other cations may 
contribute additional band structure in this region (Farmer, 1974, p. 
365).  The relative intensities of the two quartz bands in this spectral 
region appear unchanged in reflectance compared to transmittance, 
but have been shifted about 1 micrometers to shorter wavelength by 
the interaction of absorption coefficient and refractive index on the 
scattered light, which is typical (Salisbury et al., 1987b).  The weaker 
feature occurring at 18.3 micrometers in reflectance completely 
disappears in the spectrum of fused silica, indicating such a strong 
dependence on long-range order that it must be due to a lattice 
vibration.  

Weaker bands in quartz spectra between 12 and 15 micrometers 
have been attributed to symmetric Si-O-Si stretching vibrations 
(Farmer, 1974, p. 366).  When some of the silicon atoms are replaced 
by aluminum, as in the feldspars, additional Si-O-Al stretching 
vibrations are added over a longer wavelength range.  For example, 
albite displays eight highly characteristic bands in its spectrum 
between 12 and 20 micrometers.  Again, such bands are greatly 
simplified or eliminated in the spectra of glasses (Nash and Salisbury, 
1991).

Additional weak bands are displayed as troughs between 3 and 7 
micrometers.  Such bands in silicate spectra have been largely 
ignored because they are usually too weak to be seen in 
transmittance spectra.  However, they can be very useful in the 
spectral identification of fine particulate minerals and rocks, where 
they are quite prominent (Salisbury et al., 1987b; Salisbury and 
Walter, 1989; and Salisbury et al., 1991).  Because they have not 
been assigned with any certainty, we refer to such bands simply as 
overtone/combination tone bands of internal and lattice modes. 

Carbonates:
The strongest bands of carbonates are due primarily to fundamental 
internal molecular vibration bands of the CO3 ion, which are well 
understood (Farmer, 1974, p. 231).  Carbonates typically display a 
strong band near 7 micrometers due to asymmetric C-O stretching 
vibrations and weaker bands near 11.4 and 14.3 micrometers due to 
bending modes, which can be seen in the spectrum of calcite.  Very 
weak bands in the transmittance spectrum to shorter wavelength 
than 7 micrometers are strongly displayed as troughs in the 
reflectance spectrum of particulate calcite.  Because of their relative 
visibility in transmittance spectra, these weak bands have been the 
subject of study and appear to be due to combination tones of 
internal and lattice modes (Farmer, 1974, p. 236).

Sulfates:  
The sulfate ion displays a group of intense stretching fundamentals 
near 8.7 micrometers and two or more bending modes near 16 
micrometers, as can be seen in spectra of gypsum and anhydrite.  
Again, the weaker features in transmittance spectra of sulfates at 
shorter wavelength than the strong stretching fundamental are 
strongly displayed in reflectance spectra of particulate samples.  The 
complex feature near 4.6 micrometers appears to be a combination 
tone of the sulphate ion, perhaps accompanied by water combination 
tones (Hass and Sutherland, 1956).  The features near 2.8 and 6.2 
micrometers are due to water, the spectral features of which are 
discussed separately below.

Oxides:  
The metal-oxygen stretching vibration bands in oxides occur at 
longer wavelength than the Si-O features (e.g., chromite).  An 
interesting aspect of these features is that, because of the intense 
dipole oscillations induced by the vibrations of highly ionic oxides, 
their powder spectra are profoundly modified by the shape and size 
of the particles (Farmer, 1974, p. 183).  Thus, it is sometimes 
uncertain whether variations in powder spectra given by different 
specimens of a given compound are due to real differences in purity 
or phase, or merely to shape and size.  A case in point is provided by 
spectra of our two goethite samples.

Sulfides:  
Most metal-sulphur vibration bands lie beyond our wavelength 
range in the far-infrared.  We have included two examples (pyrite, 
and pyrrhotite) that do show bands within our wavelength range.

Water and Hydroxyl:  
The most common vibration bands in minerals are due to water and 
hydroxyl, the spectral features of which have been thoroughly 
reviewed by Aines and Rossman (1984).  When water is not fixed in 
a crystal lattice but is hydrogen-bonded to other water molecules, it 
results in a broad spectral feature centered near 2.9 micrometers 
due to O-H stretching vibrations and another near 6.1 micrometers 
due to H-O-H bending vibrations.  Such water may be present in fluid 
inclusions, as interlayer water in sheet silicates, or as water of 
hydration.  Water in a crystalline environment produces sharper O-H 
stretching absorption features than occur in the liquid water 
spectrum, which typically also occur at a shorter wavelength.  
Multiple O-H stretching vibrations can result when water is present 
at several sites in the crystal lattice.  Beryl and cordierite, for 
example, contain water that resides at specific sites in channels 
parallel to the C axis (Aines and Rossman, 1984).  These minerals are 
also interesting because they typically have CO2  trapped in these 
channels, which produces sharp bands near 4.3 micrometers.

Minerals containing hydroxyl without water display O-H stretching 
features near 2.7 micrometers but lack the broad feature at 2.9 
micrometers and the H-O-H bending mode at longer wavelength.  A 
good example is kaolinite, which has no interlayer water.  Most often, 
however, minerals display a combination of hydroxyl and molecular 
water bands, as in the case of antigorite.

Many minerals contain a trace of OH and water, although this is not 
reflected in their chemical formulae.  A good example is quartz, 
which typically displays multiple sharp O-H stretching features 
superimposed on a weak broad water band.  The broad water band is 
probably due to a small amount of liquid water in fluid inclusions.  
The sharper hydroxyl features are associated with hydroxylated 
alkali metals that serve to balance charges when aluminum 
substitutes for silicon (Aines and Rossman, 1984).

In addition to the fundamental O-H and H-O-H features commonly 
seen in the spectra of minerals in the 2-7 micrometers region, a 
variety of significant metal cation-OH bands can be found at longer 
wavelegth, especially in clay minerals (Stubican and Roy, 1964).  
Kaolinite, for example, displays a prominent Al-OH band near 11 
micrometers.

OH lattice vibrations are typically seen at still longer wavelengths 
(Farmer, 1974, p. 348), such as the 16-micrometers feature in the 
spectrum of antigorite.

Water and hydroxyl bands are spectrally important because most 
silicate minerals capable of doing so have undergone incipient 
alteration to hydrous phases and/or contain fluid inclusions, even 
when appearing quite fresh, because of the ubiquity of water in the 
terrestrial environment.  This is in marked contrast to other 
environments, such as that of the moon (Roedder, 1984).  It should 
be pointed out that water and hydroxyl are usually not present in 
large amounts where they are not part of the mineral stoichiometry.  
However, spectral features due to water and hydroxyl may be very 
prominent, especially in reflectance spectra of fine particulate 
materials.  This is due to the enhancement of such absorption bands 
by the increased scattering associated with fine particle size, which is 
discussed below.  Thus, an estimate of the abundance of water and 
hydroxyl relative to other phases can best be obtained from 
transmittance spectra.

Discussion of Spectra

The Role of Surface and Volume Scattering:  
All major studies of the nature of mineral spectra have used 
transmittance data (Farmer, 1974; Farmer and Palmieri, 1975, and 
references therein).  Transmittance spectra are simpler to interpret 
than reflectance or emittance spectra, because they depend solely on 
the absorption coefficient.  Reflectance and emittance spectra involve 
both the absorption coefficient and the refractive index, which causes 
spectral features to change quite significantly, especially when 
scattering becomes important in particulate samples (Salisbury et al., 
1987b).

It is apparent from inspection of our mineral spectra that particle 
size has a very significant effect on reflectance spectra.  A 
mathematical model of reflectance from particulate samples has been 
developed by Hapke (1981).  We focus here on a qualitative physical 
model to provide a basic understanding of how and why spectral 
features change with particle size, addressing the role of surface and 
volume scattering.

The radiation returned to the observer in reflectance from a 
particulate sample has been scattered by the particles.  This 
scattering takes place by two processes: surface scattering, which 
involves rays that have reflected from the surfaces of grains without 
penetration; and volume scattering, which involves rays that have 
been refracted into grain interiors and then scattered or refracted 
back out.  Which of these processes dominates returned radiation is 
determined primarily by the absorption coefficient and particle size 
(Vincent and Hunt, 1968).

The wavelength variation in absorption coefficient can be 
determined from a transmittance spectrum.  This can be illustrated 
with quartz transmission spectra, where the highest absorption 
coefficient is associated with the Si-O stretching vibration near 9.2 
micrometers.  A weaker band due to the bending mode near 21.5 
micrometers is accompanied by the still weaker feature near 19.5 
micrometers, and progressively weaker stretching features can be 
seen near 12.5, 12.7 and 14.5 micrometers.  

The effects of particle size on these spectral features of different 
intensity can be seen in our spectra of different particle size ranges 
of quartz.

Reflectance from the smooth surface of a solid sample, of course, 
eliminates multiple scattering.  As a result, the entire spectrum is 
dominated by simple Fresnel reflectance from the surface (Salisbury 
et al., 1987b), and the spectral features are reflectance peaks 
associated with the strongest molecular vibration bands.  The 
correlation of reflectance peaks with very strong absorption bands is 
counterintuitive to those researchers accustomed to working in the 
visible and near-infrared.  This effect is due to the very strong 
absorption coefficient associated with these bands, which induces a 
mirror-like opacity at these wavelengths.

For the coarse particulate 75-250 micrometers particle-size range, 
the reflectance peaks, or "reststrahlen bands," discussed above are 
still apparent between 7.5 and 24 micrometers.  However the 
appearance of the spectrum between 2.1 and 7.5 micrometers has 
changed significantly.  Weak but distinct alkali metal-OH features can 
be seen between 2.8 and 3.2 micrometers, and a series of 
overtone/combination tone bands are visible between 3.5 and 7.5 
micrometers.  These spectral features are all expressed as troughs, 
not peaks, showing that this region of the spectrum is dominated by 
volume scattering.  What has occurred is that the particle size has 
become small enough, on average, to allow passage of photons 
completely through the grains in this spectral region of relatively low 
absorption coefficient.  That is, the grains are optically thin.  More 
photons are absorbed in band centers than in band wings during 
volume scattering, and reflectance minima (troughs) occur.

Thus, for particulate silicates, the spectral range documented in this 
library is generally dominated by volume scattering and absorption 
band troughs on the left side of each figure and by surface scattering 
and absorption band peaks on the right side.  The dividing line is the 
sharp minimum in reflectance associated with the principal 
Christiansen frequency displayed for quartz at 7.4 micrometers.

Changes in spectral contrast:  
Considering first the reflectance minima associated with volume 
scattering, band depth (Clark and Roush, 1984) is a measure of band 
intensity commonly referred to as spectral contrast.  It is apparent in 
comparing spectra of coarse and fine particulate size ranges that this 
spectral contrast changes with changing particle size.  However, the 
change is not consistent, spectral contrast sometimes increasing and 
sometimes decreasing with decreasing particle size.  The  explanation 
for this behavior lies in the relationship between mean optical path 
length and particle size, which can be illustrated with three cases.  
Mean optical path length (MOPL) is the mean distance photons will 
pass through a material before total absorption takes place (Clark 
and Roush, 1984).  When the absorption coefficient is relatively high 
and the MOPL is much less than the mean grain diameter in a 
particulate sample, all photons entering the grains are absorbed.  If 
the MOPL remains smaller than the mean particle diameter, even at 
a finer particle-size range, photon absorption remains essentially 
unchanged.  Something close to this first case is seen in the centers of 
the overtone/combination tone bands of quartz near 5.4 and 6.2 
micrometers.  The reflectance in these band centers increases only 
slightly in the spectrum of the finer particle-size range compared to 
that of the coarser size range (i.e., the band remains nearly 
saturated).  A better example is seen in the center of the hydroxyl 
stretching fundamental near 2.7 micrometers in the spectra of 
antigorite.  The band center remains saturated at about 1% 
reflectance for both coarse and fine particle-size ranges.

A second case occurs at intermediate absorption coefficient when the 
MOPL is initially on the order of the mean grain diameter.  As the 
particle size decreases, many more photons survive passage through 
the grains and a significantly larger portion of the incoming radiation 
will be scattered back in the direction of the observer.  This second 
case applies to the wings of the 5.4 and 6.2 micrometers bands of 
quartz and to the wings of the hydroxyl band of antigorite.  Here 
reflectance increases with decreasing particle size.

When the reflectance in the wings of a band rise significantly with 
decreasing particle size (Case 2), while the band center remains 
saturated or nearly so (Case 1), an increase in spectral contrast 
occurs.  This effect causes absorption bands having the right ranges 
of absorption coefficient between band wings and band centers to 
display intense bands at fine particle size.  This occurs not only for 
many of the silicate overtone/combination tone bands (especially for 
quartz and olivine) but also for carbonate and sulfate combination 
tones and the fundamental O-H and C-H stretching vibration bands.  
Thus, spectra of fine particulate mineral mixtures may be dominated 
out of proportion to their abundance by minerals that display such 
spectral behavior, as shown elsewhere for igneous rocks and 
meteorites (Salisbury et al., 1989; Salisbury et al., 1991).

A third illustrative case occurs when the MOPL is already much 
greater than mean particle diameter at the coarser particle size.  In 
this case, the bulk of potentially backscattered radiation is already 
returned to the observer at large particle size.  Thus, a reduction in 
mean grain diameter has proportionally less effect than when MOPL 
starts out close to mean grain diameter.  This third case applies to 
the wings of the weaker overtone/combinaton tone band of quartz 
near 4.5 micrometers.  Here the wings rise relatively less than the 
band center,  which is affected more by Case 2 scattering.  Thus, this 
band decreases in spectral contrast with decreasing particle size, 
which is the norm for weak bands displayed in the visible and near-
infrared.

We turn now to the reststrahlen bands dominated by surface 
scattering.  These absorption bands produce prominent reflectance 
peaks for solid samples and at coarse particle size, which are greatly 
reduced in intensity for the fine particle size range.  In fact, the 
weakest reststrahlen reflectance peak of quartz at 14.5 micrometers 
turns into a trough at the finest particle size.  While changing particle 
size may have resulted in changes in single particle albedo and 
scattering geometry (Conel, 1969), Salisbury and Eastes (1985) 
focused on a physical model depending on porosity to explain the 
decline in spectral contrast of the reststrahlen bands.  They noted 
that when a very fine (<5 micrometers) powder is packed to reduce 
porosity, its spectrum displays reflectance peaks as prominent as 
those displayed by the coarser particle-size ranges.  They suggested 
that the increased porosity associated with fine particle size resulted 
in formation of photon traps.  That is, that the pores acted like small 
black bodies.  A similar explanation was offered earlier by Lyon 
(1964) and Aronson et al. (1966).  However, research in progress 
suggests that the change in shape and intensity of the reststrahlen 
bands is due more to the occurrence of substantial volume scattering 
at fine particle size rather than to photon trapping, which is 
essentially a surface scattering effect.  Briefly, it appears that the 
role of porosity is to physically separate 1-5 micrometers diameter 
particles that are optically thin, even in the reststrahlen bands (Hunt 
and Logan, 1972).  When such particles are separated by more than a 
wavelength, they scatter independently as optically thin, volume-
scattering particles.  When packed closely together, however, they 
scatter coherently as if they were large, optically thick, surface-
scattering particles.  Thus, the loss of spectral contrast of reststrahlen 
bands for materials of fine particle size appears to be due directly to 
particle size and only indirectly (but critically) to porosity.

It is important to note in any discussion of the spectral contrast of 
reststrahlen bands that such bands do persist in spectra of fine 
materials, even if reduced in intensity and changed in shape.  In 
addition, the reststrahlen bands of some minerals are more 
persistent than those of others.  As shown by Salisbury and Walter 
(1989) and Salisbury et al. (1991), quartz, olivine, and pyroxene 
display such persistent reststrahlen bands.  Thus, the reststrahlen 
region may suffer reduced spectral contrast but is by no means 
either featureless or useless in spectra of particulate mineral 
mixtures.  

Transparency peaks:  
We have referred to the region of the spectrum where the 
reststrahlen bands occur as dominated by surface scattering.  This is 
obviously true for solid samples of silicates and for the coarse 
particle-size range, which exhibit prominent reflectance peaks.  
However, it can be seen in the transmittance spectrum of quartz that 
a region of relatively high transparency exists between the 
asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrational features in the 
vicinity of 10.5 to 12 micrometers.  The absorption coefficient here is 
low enough so that grains become optically thin and volume 
scattering of the Case 2 type (see above) occurs as the particle size 
range is reduced from 75-250 micrometers to 0-75 micrometers.  
Because the strong reststrahlen reflectance peaks are greatly 
diminished at fine particle size, the broad transparency peak 
becomes a prominent feature centered at about 11 micrometers.  
Such transparency peaks may be very prominent in the spectra of 
some minerals (e.g., antigorite).

Transparency peaks were first noted without explanation in 
reflectance spectra of rocks by Hovis and Callahan (1966).  Conel 
(1969) described and explained such features (expressed as troughs 
in emittance) in spectra of quartz.  Salisbury and Walter (1989) 
showed that the wavelength of the transparency peak could be 
related to the composition of igneous rocks.  Documented here is the 
spectral behavior of a wide range of rock-forming minerals, showing 
the nature and magnitude of transparency peaks that occur in 
reflectance of fine particulate samples.

Note that the prominence of this feature is dependent on the degree 
to which the adjacent reflectance peaks associated with the 
reststrahlen bands are diminished in spectra of the fine particle-size 
range.  As explained above, the loss of these peaks appears to be 
related to the increased porosity and volume scattering in a sample 
due to very fine particle size.  When a sample is sifted into a sample 
cup, the finest particles tend to be suspended in air and drift away 
during sifting.  Thus, a sample sifted and measured repeatedly will 
tend to increase in mean grain diameter and to display progressively 
stronger reststrahlen bands.  We have attempted to avoid this with 
our samples, but there is some obvious variability of reststrahen-
band spectral contrast (compare acmite1f and acmite2f).  Also, a few 
samples were not prepared by us and vary in particle-size range as a 
result (olivine4, for example, is completely lacking in very fine 
particles).

Despite the fact that some minerals fail to display transparency 
features, it is apparent from the spectra in this volume that such 
peaks (expressed as troughs in emittance) could be prominent 
spectral features in the 8-14 micrometers spectrum of a fine-
particulate regolith.  Salisbury et al. (1991) suggest that the 
distortion of a spectrum by the sharp thermal gradient associated 
with a vacuum environment may make such broad features difficult 
to detect, but further measurements of appropriate candidate 
materials in a simulated space environment are needed to confirm 
this.

Christiansen feature:  
A final spectral feature that is prominent at fine particle size is 
associated with the principal Christiansen frequency.  This is a 
reflectance minimum that occurs because the real part of the 
refractive index undergoes rapid changes (anomalous dispersion) at a 
slightly shorter wavelength than the most intense molecular 
vibration band.  Consequently, the refractive index approaches 1, 
resulting in a minimum of scattering, at a wavelength where 
absorption is still relatively low.  With little scattering and little 
absorption, infrared radiation can penetrate a sample relatively 
easily, resulting in a minimum in reflectance or a maximum in 
emittance.  This feature can be seen in reflectance at all particle-size 
ranges, but it is one of the more easily recognized spectral features in 
reflectance of the finest particle-size range (e.g., near 7.3 
micrometers for quartz).  Conel (1969) first showed that the 
wavelength of this feature is a good indicator of mineralogy.  Logan 
et al. (1973) showed that the wavelength of this feature can also be 
used to determine igneous rock type and demonstrated its utility for 
mapping compositional variations in the lunar regolith.  The 
relationship between wavelength of the Christiansen feature and 
composition has been determined on a more quantitative basis for 
igneous rocks by Walter and Salisbury (1989) and for meteorites by 
Salisbury et al. (1991).

The Effect of Crystallographic Orientation:  
Many minerals are birefringent and have a different spectral 
response depending on crystallographic orientation.  This is 
illustrated in the solid sample spectra of orthoclase.  The occurrence 
of such orientation effects is what makes it necessary to sift 
particulate samples, or at least their upper millimeter, into sample 
cups for measurement.  Tapping a cup or using a knife edge to level a 
sample tends to orient the grains, especially if the mineral has a 
prominent cleavage.  Some samples having an extremely asymmetric 
shape, such as micas, will tend to develop grain orientation despite 
sifting.  Our laboratory studies of calcite show, however, that more 
equant grains are randomly oriented when sifted, despite very 
strongly developed cleavage.

The Effect of Packing:  
As discussed above in the section on spectral contrast, it has been 
shown that packing a fine particulate sample to reduce its porosity 
will greatly increase the prominence of the fundamental molecular 
vibration bands.  Thus, spectra of packed samples are presented for 
some minerals, such as clays, for which coarse-grained samples 
showing the fundamental molecular vibration bands are not 
available.  Packing will tend to orient the grains parallel to their 
strongest cleavage or parting, so that these spectra are most similar 
to solid sample spectra obtained in that orientation. 

The Effect of Atmospheric Gases:  
A spectrometer must be vigorously purged with dry nitrogen (or dry 
air from which CO2 has been removed) in order to avoid 
incorporating band structure due to atmospheric H2O and CO2 in the 
spectra.  Spectra of some samples were obtained without adequate 
purging and display extremely weak atmospheric bands (e.g. the 
solid sample spectrum of acmite1).  These atmospheric bands are 
usually easy to identify and do not interfere with the major 
molecular vibration bands of the silicates, so these spectra were 
retained in the library.  Some minerals, such as beryl, cordierite, and 
topaz, contain CO2 gas trapped in channels or in fluid inclusions 
within the minerals.

The Effect of Impurities:  
Two kinds of impurities introduce spectral artifacts: those that are 
added to the sample during laboratory processing and those that 
were an original part of the sample.  Impurities added include water 
(in KBr pellets) and hydrocarbon, while the most common impurities 
within samples are quartz, calcite, and products of  exsolution and 
alteration.

KBr pellets are pressed under vacuum to remove water, but the 
material is so hygroscopic that this process quickly begins to reverse.  
The method chosen to compensate for this was to ratio the sample 
pellet transmittance against that of a blank pellet  made under 
identical circumstances.  If the KBr for both pellets was initially 
ground to the same particle size so that the same surface area was 
available to atmospheric water vapor, held under vacuum for the 
same amount of time to remove water, and then exposed to humid 
room air for the same amount of time in transfer (as pellets) to the 
purged and dry environment of the spectrometer sample 
compartment, the KBr of both pellets should contain the same 
amount of water.  Then a ratio of sample transmittance to that of the 
blank pellet should display water bands that are intrinsic to the 
sample only.  However, in practice the sample transmittance 
spectrum sometimes displays more of a water band than the 
reflectance data suggest is reasonable.  The transmittance spectrum 
of kyanite, for example, displays a strong molecular water band at 
2.9 micrometers, but the lack of such a band in the spectrum of the 
75-250 micrometers size range suggests that the KBr pellet is 
contaminated by introduced water.  This water appears to be 
introduced as water absorbed on the very fine (<2 micrometers) 
particulate sample grains.  We have tried to avoid this effect by 
grinding the samples under alcohol, but it remains a source of error 
in the spectral data.  Thus, the broad water-absorption bands 
centered at 2.9 micrometers in transmittance should be used with 
caution to estimate sample water content and should be verified with 
reflectance data.  

It should also be noted that sample pellet and blank pellet 
sometimes do not contain an identical amount of KBr because of lost 
material squeezed past the die during pressing.  This has caused a 
few transmittance spectra to exceed 100%, but it is a significant 
problem only at the short wavelength end of the spectrum, where 
the samples typically have very low absorbance.

Sample spectra often display weak fundamental C-H stretching 
vibration bands (a triplet)near 3.3 micrometers.  Solid samples 
typically have acquired fingerprints to account for their C-H bands, 
although some samples appear to have been contaminated by some 
oily lubricant used with a rock saw.  Particulate samples may be 
contaminated by hydrocarbons in several ways.  First, they were 
ground under alcohol or acetone as described above.  Despite oven 
drying of these samples at 100¡ C, a trace of hydrocarbon may 
remain.  We also find that particulate samples simply exposed to 
laboratory air will, over time, develop similar hydrocarbon bands 
due to adsorbed species.  These spectral artifacts, like the water 
vapor bands, are usually so weak that they are difficult to detect at 
the scale at which spectra are presented in this book, but can be see, 
for example, in the fine particle size spectrum of grossular garnet 
(grossu2f). 

Samples contaminated with quartz were rejected, because quartz 
bands are so strong that even a small amount will introduce 
interfering bands.  Samples contaminated with calcite (or dolomite) 
were treated with either acetic or hydrochloric acid to remove the 
contaminant.  It was found that an exceedingly small amount of 
carbonate can usually be detected as a contaminant, because two of 
the carbonate overtone/combination band near 4 micrometers that 
gains spectral contrast at fine particle size occur where silicates tend 
to be transparent.  The spectrum of the coarse 75-250 micrometers 
size range of epidote is a good illustration of this and also 
demonstrates that the infrared spectrum is more sensitive than X-
ray analysis for detection of very small quantities of carbonate.

Some minerals tend to contain exsolution products, and we have 
included several of these in our collection, despite their lack of 
perfect purity, because exsolution is so common.  Microcline.1, for 
example, contains cryptoperthitic high albite, as does sanidine.3.  
Hypersthene.1 contains a small amount of exsolved clinopyroxene. 

As discussed above (see Major Spectral Features of Minerals), water 
is ubiquitous in terrestrial environments and terrestrial minerals 
subject to alteration have inevitably been slightly altered, even when 
quite fresh in appearance.  Hydroxyl O-H stretching vibration bands 
tend to become more prominent (i.e., gain spectral contrast) as 
particle size decreases, as discussed above.  At the same time, silicate 
minerals normally lacking hydroxyl tend to be quite transparent in 
the 2.6-3.0 micrometers region.  Consequently, hydroxyl bands due 
to a very small amount of alteration product typically are very 
prominently expressed in reflectance spectra of the 0-75 
micrometers particle-size range.  Transmittance spectra give a better 
idea of the absolute amount of alteration product present.  A good 
example can be seen in spectra of kyanite, which shows no hydroxyl 
bands superimposed on the broad water band in its transmittance 
spectrum near 2.7 micrometers, indicating the presence of very little 
hydroxyl, but does show very strong and distinctive kaolinite 
hydroxyl bands near 2.7 micrometers in the spectrum of the 0-75 
micrometers particle-size range.

Relating Laboratory Data to Remote Sensing Measurements:  
The crossover point (i.e., point of equal energy) for reflectance and 
emittance for most remote sensing targets in the solar system lies 
somewhere in the 2.5-5 micrometers region, depending on the 
albedo and temperature of the surface.  Thus, most of the spectral 
range presented in this work is dominated by emittance.  Yet, 
spectral data are presented in reflectance, primarily because 
reflectance is much easier to measure in the laboratory.  Spectral 
emissivity is usually predicted from reflectance of opaque materials 
using Kirchhoff's Law, typically stated in its simplest form (without 
wavelength or directional subscripts) as E=1-R, where E and R are 
emissivity and reflectance (Nicodemus, 1965).  Even in regions of 
relative transparency, where volume scattering dominates the 
powder spectra, the samples used in this study can be considered 
opaque because of their thickness.  However, the direct application of 
Kirchhoff's Law to the spectral library presented here is not possible 
because measurements were made in biconical, rather than 
hemispherical, reflectance.  This means that the library spectra do 
not provide a quantitative measure of the infrared radiation 
scattered in all directions, as do the relatively few directional 
hemispherical reflectance spectra described in the next section.  
However, laboratory and field measurements have repeatedly shown 
that biconical reflectance measurements may be used qualitatively to 
predict emissivity (Lyon, 1964; Hunt and Vincent, 1968, 
Bartholomew et al., 1989).  That is, the shape of the spectral curves 
in our mineral library can be used to predict the shapes, but not the 
absolute intensities, of spectral curves in emittance.  Thus, our 
library of mineral spectra may be used qualitatively in spectral 
searches of remote sensing data to identify unknown minerals.  

Quantitative prediction of the magnitude, as well as the kind, of 
spectral features to be seen in spectral emittance requires directional 
hemispherical reflectance measurements, such as those described in 
the next section.  Such measurements capture both the forward and 
backscattered radiation, so that an absolute measurement is obtained 
of R.  One caveat, however, is that Kirchhoff's Law holds true only 
under isothermal conditions.  As shown by Logan et al. (1973), a 
vacuum environment fosters a thermal gradient in the uppermost 
few micrometers of a particulate sample that may exaggerate 
spectral contrast and distort spectral features.  As shown by 
Salisbury and Walter (1989), however, systematic correction factors 
can be developed to predict the effect of a vacuum environment on 
spectral features.  Fortunately, the presence of an atmosphere, even 
a thin martian-type atmosphere, leaves the thermal gradient and 
spectral contrast little changed from terrestrial conditions.  Thus, it 
appears that the biconical reflectance spectra illustrated in this book 
may be used to qualitatively predict spectral emissivity in a variety 
of potential remote sensing environments.

Mineral Mixing Models:  Using quantitative directional hemispherical 
reflectance spectra, Thompson and Salisbury (1991) have recently 
shown that the spectra of silicate minerals in the reststrahlen region 
combine linearly to make up the spectra of mineral mixtures for 
particles large enough to be optically thick (e.g., the 75-250 
micrometers size range).   


References
Aines, R.D., and Rossman, G.R., 1984, Water in Minerals?  A peak in 
the infrared:  Jour. of Geophysical Research, v. 89, p. 4059-4071.

Appleman, D.E., and Evans, H.T., Jr., 1973, Job 9214 Indexing and 
least-squares refinement of powder diffraction data:  U. S. 
Department of Commerce, NTIS Document PB-216188.

Aronson, J.R., Emslie, A.G., and McLinden, H.G., 1966, Infrared spectra 
from particulate surfaces: Science, v. 152, p. 345-346.

Bailey, S.W., 1980, Structures of layer silicates: in Crystal Structures 
of Clay Minerals and Their X-ray Identification, G.W. Brindley and G. 
Brown, eds., Mineralogical Society, London, p. 1-124.

Bartholomew, M.J., Kahle, A.B., and Hoover, G., 1989, Infrared 
spectroscopy (2.3-20 micrometers) for the geological interpretation 
of remotely-sensed multispectral thermal infrared data: 
International Jour. of Remote Sensing, v. 10, p. 529-544.

Conel, J.E., 1969, Infrared emissivities of silicates:  Experimental 
results and a cloudy atmosphere model of spectral emission from 
condensed particulate mediums:  Jour. of Geophysical Research, v. 74, 
p. 1614-1634.

Clark, R.N., and Roush, T.L., 1984, Reflectance spectroscopy:  
Quantitative analysis techniques for remote sensing applications:  
Jour. of Geophysical Research, v. 89, p. 6329-6340.

Drever, J.I., 1973, The preparation of oriented clay mineral 
specimens for X-ray diffraction analysis by a filter membrane peel 
technique:  American Mineralogist, v. 58, p. 553-554.

Elcombe, M.M., 1967, Some aspects of the lattice dynamics of quartz: 
Proceedings of the Physics Society of London, v. 91, p. 947-958.

Estep-Barnes, P.A., 1977, Infrared spectroscopy: Chapter 2 in 
Physical Methods in Determinative Mineralogy, 2nd edition, J. 
Zussman, ed., Academic Press, New York, p. 529-603.

Farmer, V.C., ed., 1974, The Infrared Spectra of Minerals. Monograph 
No. 4, Mineralogical Society (London), 539 pp.

Farmer, V.C., and Palmieri, F., 1975, The characterization of soil 
minerals by infrared spectroscopy: In Soil Components, v. 2 Inorganic 
Components, J. E. Gieseking, ed.,Springer-Verlag, New York, p. 573-
670.

Ferraro, J.R., ed., 1982, The Sadtler Infrared Spectra Handbook of 
Mineral and Clays:  Sadtler Research Laboratories, Philadelphia, 476 
pp. 

Fleischer, Michael, 1983, Glossary of Mineral Species 1983:  The 
Mineralogical Record, Inc., Tucson, 202 pp.

Hapke, Bruce, 1981, Bidirectional reflectance spectroscopy: 1. Theory:  
Jour. of Geophysical Research, v. 86, p. 3039-3054.

Harrington, P.B., and Isenhour, T.L., 1987, A quantitative measure of 
the reliability of searches of spectral libraries: Analytica Chimica 
Acta, v. 197, p. 105-119.

Hass, M., and Sutherland, G.B.B.M., 1956, The infra-red spectrum and 
crystal structure of gypsum:  Proceedings of the Royal Society, 
(London), v. 236, p. 427-445.

Hoover, Gorden, and Kahle, A.B., 1986, A Portable Spectrometer for 
Use from 5 to 16 Micrometers:  Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
Publications 86-19, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 53 
pp.

Hovis, W.A. and Callahan, W.R., 1966, Infrared reflectance spectra of 
igneous rocks, tuffs and red sandstone from 0.5 to 22 micrometers:  
Jour. of the Optical Society of America, v. 56, p. 639-643.

Hunt, G.R., and Logan, L. M., 1972, Variation of single particle mid-
infrared emission spectrum with particle size:  Applied Optics, v. 11, 
p. 142-147.

Hunt, G.R., and Salisbury, J.W., 1974, Mid-infrared Spectral Behavior 
of Igneous Rocks:  Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories 
Technical Report, TR-74-0625, 143 pp.

Hunt, G.R., and Salisbury, J.W., 1975, Mid-infrared Spectral Behavior 
of Sedimentary Rocks:  Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories 
Technical Report, TR-75-0356, 49 pp.

Hunt, G.R., and Salisbury, J.W., 1976, Mid-infrared Spectral Behavior 
of Metamorphic Rocks:  Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories 
Technical Report, TR-76-0003, 67 pp.

Hunt, G.R., and Vincent, R.K., 1968, The behavior of spectral features 
in the infrared emission from particulate surfaces of various grain 
sizes:  Jour. of Geophysical Research, v. 73, p. 6039-6046.

Kahle, A.B., and Goetz, A.F.H., 1983, Mineralogic information from a 
new airborne thermal infrared multispectral scanner:  Science, v. 
222, p. 24-27.

Logan, L.M., Hunt, G.R., and Salisbury, J.W., 1974, The use of mid-
infrared spectroscopy in remote sensing of space targets:  in Infrared 
and Raman Spectroscopy of Lunar and Terrestrial Minerals, C. Karr, 
ed., Academic Press, New York, p. 117-142.

Logan, L.M., Hunt, G.R., Salisbury, J.W., and Balsamo, S.R., 1973, 
Compositional implications of Christiansen frequency maxima for 
infrared remote sensing applications:  Jour. of Geophysical Research, 
v. 78, p. 4983-5003.

Lowry, S.R., and Huppler, D.A., 1981, Infrared spectral search system 
for gas chromatography/Fourier transform infrared spectrometry:  
Analytical Chemistry, v. 53, p. 889-893.

Lyon, R.J.P., 1963 Evaluation of Infrared Spectrophotometry for 
Compositional Analysis of Lunar and Planetary Soils:  Stanford 
Research Institute, Final Report under Contract NASr-49(04) and 
NASA Technical Note D-1871, 139 pp.

Lyon, R.J.P., 1964, Evaluation of Infrared Spectrophotometry for 
Compositional Analysis of Lunar and Planetary Soils.  Part II:  Rough 
and Powdered Surfaces:  NASA Contractor Report CR-100, 262 pp.

Lyon, R.J.P., and Green, A.A., 1975, Reflectance and emittance of 
terrain in the mid-infrared (6-25 micrometers) region:  in Infrared 
and Raman Spectroscopy of Lunar and Terrestrial Minerals, C. Karr, 
ed., Academic Press, New York, p. 165-195.

Nash, D.B., and Salisbury, J.W., 1991, Infrared reflectance spectra of 
plagioclase feldspars:  Geophysical Research Letters, v. 18, p. 1151-
1154.

Nicodemus, F.E., 1965, Directional reflectance and emissivity of an 
opaque surface:  Applied Optics, v. 4, p. 767-773.

Reynolds, R.C., 1980, Interstratified clay minerals:  in Crystal 
Structures of Clay Minerals and their X-ray identification, G.W. 
Brindley and G. Brown, eds., Mineralogical Society ( London), p. 249-
303.

Roedder, Edwin, 1984, Fluid Inclusions:  Reviews in Mineralogy, v. 
12, Mineralogical Society of America, Washington, 644 pp.

Salisbury, J.W., and Eastes, J.W., 1985, The effect of particle size and 
porosity on spectral contrast in the mid-infrared:  Icarus, v. 64, p. 
586-588.

Salisbury, J.W., and Walter, L.S., 1989, Thermal infrared (2.5 to 13.5 
micrometers) spectroscopic remote sensing of igneous rock types on 
particulate planetary surfaces:  Jour. of Geophysical Research, v. 94, 
p. 9192-9202.

Salisbury, J. W., D'Aria, D. M., and Jarosewich, E. J., 1991, Midinfrared 
(2.5-13.5 micrometers) reflectance spectra of powdered stony 
meteorites:  Icarus, v. 92, p. 280-297.

Salisbury, J.W., Hapke, Bruce, and Eastes, J.W., 1987b, Usefulness of 
weak bands in mid-infrared remote sensing of particulate planetary 
surfaces:  Jour. of Geophysical Research, v. 92, p. 702-710.

Salisbury, J.W., Walter, L.S., and Vergo, Norma, 1987a, Mid-Infrared 
(2.1-25 micrometers) Spectra of Minerals:  First Edition:  U.S. 
Geological Survey Open-File Report 87-263, Reston, 386 pp.


Simon, I., and McMahon, H. O., 1953, Study of the structure of quartz, 
cristobalite, and vitreous silica by reflection in the infrared:  Journal 
of Chemical Physics, v. 21, p. 23-30.

Stimson, M.M., and O'Donnell, M.J., 1952, The infrared and ultraviolet 
spectra of cystine and isocystine in the solid state:  Jour. of the 
American Chemical Society, v. 74, p. 1805-1808.

Stubican, V., and Roy, Ruston, 1964, A new approach to assignment of 
infra-red absorption bands in layer-structure silicates:  Zeitschrift fur 
Kristallographie, v. 115, p. 200-214.

Thompson, J. L., and Salisbury, J. W., 1991, The mid-infrared 
reflectance of mineral mixtures (7-14 micrometers): Remote Sensing 
of Environment, (in press).

Vincent, R.K., and Hunt, G.R., 1968, Infrared reflectance from mat 
surfaces: Applied Optics, v. 7, p. 53-59.

Vincent, R.K., Rowan, L.C., Gillespie, R.E., and Knapp, Charles, 1975, 
Thermal-infrared spectra and chemical analyses of twenty-six 
igneous rock samples:  Remote Sensing of Environment, v. 4, p. 199-
209. 

Walter, L.S., and Salisbury, J.W., 1989, Spectral characterization of 
igneous rocks in the 8 to 12 micrometers region:  Jour. of Geophysical 
Research, v. 94, p. 9203-9213.



